Chapter one
Last night I dreamt I went to Manderley again. It seemed to me I stood
by the iron gate leading to the drive, and for a while I could not enter,
for the way was barred to me. There was a padlock and chain upon the
gate. I called in my dream to the lodge-keeper, and had no answer, and
peering closer through the rusted spokes of the gate I saw that the lodge
was uninhabited.
No smoke came from the chimney, and the little lattice windows gaped
forlorn. Then, like all dreamers, I was possessed of a sudden with
supernatural powers and passed like a spirit through the barrier before
me. The drive wound away in front of me, twisting and turning as it had
always done, but as I advanced I was aware that a change had come upon
it; it was narrow and unkempt, not the drive that we had known. At first
I was puzzled and did not understand, and it was only when I bent my head
to avoid the low swinging branch of a tree that I realized what had happened.
Nature had come into her own again and, little by little, in her stealthy,
insidious way had encroached upon the drive with long, tenacious fingers.
The woods, always a menace even in the past, had triumphed in the end.
They crowded, dark and uncontrolled, to the borders of the drive. The
beeches with white, naked limbs leant close to one another, their branches
intermingled in a strange embrace, making a vault above my head like the
archway of a church. And there were other trees as well, trees that I
did not recognize, squat oaks and tortured elms that straggled cheek by
jowl with the beeches, and had thrust themselves out of the quiet earth,
along with monster shrubs and plants, none of which I remembered.
The drive was a ribbon now, a thread of its former self, with gravel surface
gone, and choked with grass and moss. The trees had thrown out low branches,
making an impediment to progress; the gnarled roots looked like skeleton
claws. Scattered here and again amongst this jungle growth I would
recognize shrubs that had been landmarks in our time, things of culture
and grace, hydrangeas whose blue heads had been famous. No hand had checked their progress, and they had gone native now, rearing to monster height
without a bloom, black and ugly as the nameless parasites that grew beside
them.
On and on, now east now west, wound the poor thread that once had been
our drive. Sometimes I thought it lost, but it appeared again, beneath
a fallen tree perhaps, or struggling on the other side of a muddied ditch
created by the winter rains. I had not thought the way so long. Surely
the miles had multiplied, even as the trees had done, and this path led
but to a labyrinth, some choked wilderness, and not to the house at all.
I came upon it suddenly; the approach masked by the unnatural growth of
a vast shrub that spread in all directions, and I stood, my heart thumping
in my breast, the strange prick of tears behind my eyes.
There was Manderley, our Manderley, secretive and silent as it had always
been, the grey stone shining in the moonlight of my dream, the mullioned
windows reflecting the green lawns and the terrace. Time could not wreck
the perfect symmetry of those walls, nor the site itself, a jewel in the
hollow of a hand.
The terrace sloped to the lawns, and the lawns stretched to the sea, and
turning I could see the sheet of silver placid under the moon, like a
lake undisturbed by wind or storm. No waves would come to ruffle this
dream water, and no bulk of cloud, wind-driven from the west, obscure
the clarity of this pale sky. I turned again to the house, and though
it stood inviolate, untouched, as though we ourselves had left but
yesterday, I saw that the garden had obeyed the jungle law, even as the
woods had done. The rhododendrons stood fifty feet high, twisted and
entwined with bracken, and they had entered into alien marriage with a
host of nameless shrubs, poor, bastard things that clung about their roots
as though conscious of their spurious origin. A lilac had mated with a
copper beech, and to bind them yet more closely to one another the
malevolent ivy, always an enemy to grace, had thrown her tendrils about
the pair and made them prisoners. Ivy held prior place in this lost garden,
the long strands crept across the lawns, and soon would encroach upon
the house itself. There was another plant too, some half-breed from the
woods, whose seed had been scattered long ago beneath the trees and then
forgotten, and now, marching in unison with the ivy, thrust its ugly form
like a giant rhubarb towards the soft grass where the daffodils had blown. 